**Final Reflection**

Geoff West remarks, “measurement has played a central role in the development of our understanding of the entire universe”, and further describes the complexities and value of data science to better understand the economic and social systems which reflect human behavior in our society. Data science has revolutionized many aspects of understanding these complex systems and phenomena resulting from them. With evolving, vast repositories of data, the data science field is being shaped in new and improved ways, thus expanding our knowledge on adaptive, economic, and social systems. 

As we continue to live in a digital era, data science has perpetuated seemingly endless possibilities to improve the quality of life. Large sources of data include devices connected to the internet and the use of social media as well. These trends of increasing data are just a few of many sources that can be applied to various areas and fields. Data science has had its most useful applications in finance, business, sports, agriculture, government, and health. In all these sectors, especially business and health-related, given the pandemic, there have been significant gains in our ability to describe, analyze, and predict human development processes with machine learning algorithms, neural networks, and spatial analysis as a product of data science. Our projects in class, including selecting and mapping an LMIC, show how significant and powerful tools of data science can potentially be when certain algorithms are optimized for its performance. As more businesses and financial institutions realize the advantages and this potential of data science, more are inclined to adopt the methods into their business models and aid them in having an edge over competitors. For example, in my previous reflection, I researched how machine learning aided in the profitability of Paypal by reducing risk and fraud to ensure customers’ accounts were secured and protected. Paypal has one of the lowest rates of fraud loss, so this understanding and detection of customers’ “genuine” versus “fraud” accounts could not have been as efficiently executed without the applications of data science. Data science, to a similar extent, has had significant gains in research related to the pandemic. Over the past few months and during quarantine, monitoring the spread of the virus has been crucial. Using phone data to detect those who have come in contact with a person testing positive has been implemented with machine learning approaches. As we seek to understand many of the unknown factors of COVID-19, machine learning has helped mitigate the devastating impact of the virus and predict new cases, making it one of the most useful disciplines in advancing our knowledge of the virus. 

To this end, some ethical concerns regarding the use of data science tend to arise. Given the ability to describe, analyze, and predict human development processes and models in numerous fields, data science has a lot of potential for understanding human behavior, but in some manners, can also serve to harm. Lack of transparency in data collection, lack of consented access to user data, and underlying privacy issues are a few major concerns when producing predictive model outcomes. In the US, especially, the right to privacy is a fundamental freedom, so infringement on these individual freedoms leads to dire consequences. For example, in one of my reflections, I researched how the app, Mindstrong Health, essentially used data from the user’s phone activity to detect triggers or signs of a mental health disorder diagnosis. Though the goal of Mindstrong Health was to improve mental health and overall well-being, many privacy concerns regarding the use of consumer data arose. It’s important to consider the fine-line between breaching data privacy and utilizing data science for good. This fine-line is governed by privacy laws and regulations which take into account the implications of the use of data science. 

With regulations in-place, data science can be a remarkable implementation to improve human conditions. I predict that more exposure to data science in various fields will benefit our comprehensive understanding of processes in the long-run. I also anticipate that the use of data science as the means to improve our understanding of human behavior will continue to expand and grow with improved algorithms and better computational resources.
